---
title: 'Panda is not like styled-components, it's a typed Tailwind'
description: 'Clearing up misconceptions about Panda, Tailwind and other CSS-in-JS libraries'
---

Seperating by technologies is trumped architecturally by seperation of concerns, so that would actually be the mistake showing lack of skill! Actually the entire concept of React was similar, to merge DOM and JS behaviour that is related into one place. When using tailwind, on a conceptual level you have the exact same level of coupling between the component and the CSS behavior as panda, since panda does not allow runtimes variables in the objects, and is just a means to express CSS properties by coupling to them to a component by way of a loose string. The only difference is syntax -- you need to think about what data exists and where and the flow of the data instead, and not outdated notions about what technologies live in what files you probably heard a long time ago; that is actually one of the least important things in terms of code architecture and is generally the opposite direction the web has been going for the last 5-10 years.

I'm an FE dev with near 15 years experience. I have a slightly different viewpoint here to what's in the comments. I have worked on projects with styled-components/emotion and also worked with Chakra extensively which Panda's API seems to be derived from. I somehow missed the tailwind boat (that's enterprise for you!) so I am likely biased; but almost certainly the same thing can be said of those who have only ever known Tailwind. It's recognising it and taking a step back that matters. Ironically, those dismissing it are in a way dismissing the concepts behind tailwind out of hand, since Panda is very much based on the same concepts.

Tailwind and Panda both present pseudo css-rule-like interfaces and blend in tokens. Tailwind basically allows CSS rules to be provided as an unstructured string. Panda presents a JS object API that actually, on a conceptual level as opposed to syntactical, is very similar indeed.

Tailwind and Panda are actually far more alike than they are different, and people seem to have been bamboozled just because the syntax looks very different. Firstly, the assertion this is styled-components in many comments is totally incorrect. Styled components isn't a token based system out of the box with a built in core configurable theme and you pretty much can't do static atomic CSS generation. So that comparison is wrong. Panda is far more like Tailwind than styled components on a conceptual level. Afterall, in the end that `css()` function returns a list of static classnames like tailwind does.

Panda's type safety is a pretty big deal in enterprise projects (ever try a refactor incrementally delivered across hundreds of screens?), and many people will prefer that the rules are structured data and not loose string references. The structured nature of the syntax also means the AST is compatible with other static analysers like formatters, code editors and refactoring tools; meaning it is more malleable to the much wider JS ecosystem. Not to mention string concat/interpolation is a far less ergonomic means to compose data into something new than plain JS. For those adept in their editors, this is a boon. In that sense, it may have a higher shelf life.

For not as complex projects or smaller projects, sure, these advantages fade. And sure, tailwind doesn't have the syntactical overhead that panda does (which can be countered with a little vscode snippet), especially if you already got rapid at the tailwind classes. But the tradeoff is that also gives benefits. And sure, you could also use tailwind in a massive web app if you want and accepted the tradeoffs. And that's good! Tailwind will remain a good choice depending on project parameters.

"It depends" as always. But blindly planting a flag on a technology without understanding the issues at hand is an engineer habit as old as time and just exposes a lack of critical thinking, and that goes both ways.

Career wise, it pretty much always makes sense to keep and an open mind, understand what the future possibilities might be, and even be ready to jump ship at any moment if things catch on :).

My only complaint about Panda is it is perhaps a mistake to call it "css-in-js" as that implies that the full expressivity of javascript can be used alongside the css. Past wisdom has shown that to be a approach with many pitgalls. This isnt the case anyway. Panda is more like "css-in-statically-resolveable-objects" or 'css-in-in-than "css-in-js".
